Title: #2 weekly progress report
Date: 2019-10-28 10:20
Category: Blog

Good news everyone, progress in Mimiker development!

### Kernel finally runs in virtual space!

Well, almost. But let us introduce some context first. The MMU of
Malta board, the only taget platform for Mimiker as for now, operates
in either TLB or FMT modes. When TLB (*Translation Lookaside Buffer*)
mode is enabled, virtual to physical address translation is done in
hardware using TLB entries, which are backed up by in-memory page
table. In this mode, kernel has to manage all mappings, handle page
faults, decide when to flush TLB (do I have to flush out all entries
on context-switch?) , which entries to remove when TLB becomes full
(perhaps taking into account reference/modified bits). This quickly
becomes intricate and requires special care. On the other hand, this
is the most general approach to address translation, and Mimiker
already supported it for user mode threads. In the kernel mode,
however, we relied on FMT (*Fixed Mapping Translation*) mode, in which
the mapping is basically the identity function, i.e. the physical
address corresponding to virtual address v is simply
v. Not-great-not-terrible, but in fully fledged kernel one needs
e.g. may swappable threads and huge data structures, like I/O
buffers. The #406181a commit (by Cahir) brings kernel image, data and
bss sections to TLB managed virtual memory.  The improved
functionality will perform after implementing page swapper, allowing
to send unnecessary kernel code pages back to disk. In the beginning
we wrote *almost* as some work remains to be done. Namely, kernel
stacks and dynamic memory allocators still operate in FMT mode (but we
work on that).  Cahir's commit also splits virtual memory subsystem
(the **pmap**) into hardware dependend and intependend parts, what
prepares Mimiker to migrate do *arm64* platform.

###  Signal trampoline implementation

Manpower shortage force us to take lazy approach to Mimiker
development: we only fix things that are broken. There are multiple
reasons for Korn shell (ksh) crashes. One of them was buggy
implementation of return from user-defined signal handlers. Since
signals are delivered upon context switch, returning from signal
handler should restore user thread context. But signal handler is just
a user defined C function, not pretending to know its real
purpose. Upon return it acts according to SysV-ABI trying to jump back
to a non-existing caller routine, what definitely leads to a crash.
*JPsz* commit solves the problem using *trampoline* approach. When
preparing a stack frame of signal handler, the return address is set
to point to a piece of code (called the trampoline) which simply
invokes a *sigreturn* syscall, whose responsibility is to restore the
required user context. The trampoline resides in user space at the
bottom of the stack. This **will** lead to serious problems when we
make user stack non-executable, but this won't happen this week :).
