Title: #1 weekly progress report
Date: 2019-11-21 10:20
Category: Blog

Good news everyone, we start posting weekly updates on Mimiker kernel
development. Read below what our team has coded recently!

### ioctl syscall

As [NetBSD manpage](https://netbsd.gw.com/cgi-bin/man-cgi?ioctl) says

> The `ioctl()` function manipulates the underlying device parameters of
special files.  In particular, many operating characteristics of
character special files (e.g. terminals) may be controlled with
`ioctl()` requests.

And that's precisely the reason we need `ioctl`. Mimiker terminal handling
capabilities are very limited. We need a line discipline to be implemented to
support basic line editing and translating keystrokes to signals like `SIGINT`
and `SIGTSTP`.
[comment]: <> ([commit](https://github.com/cahirwpz/mimiker/commit/9794baa2c9f191b9e6190f19ebe242887a1ba8c8))

### NetBSD libc port

No OS kernel itself poses any value to end users. Therefore an extensive effort
is being put to run useful stuff on top of Mimiker kernel. We already have some
success stories here, like running Doom (no interaction yet, though) and Lua
language interpreter, but more elementary command line tools are needed. Our
latest codebase brings a partial port of `libc` and `libm` from NetBSD. Just
enough to run plenty of basic Unix tools like: `cat`, `find`, `head`, `grep`,
`kill`, `sed`, `tail`, `wc`, and finally the Korn Shell `ksh`. We hope to
make those tools part of Mimiker OS this semester!

### system call framework cleanup

Things stop working from time to time. That wouldn't happen if we had more time
to implement tests. Anyway, earlier changes to system call framework introduced
bugs to `getdirentries` and `execve` syscalls, thus making `ls` command and
`lua` interpreter crash. (fixed by *jpsz*)

### non-local jumps: missing pieces

Standard C library functions `setjmp` and `longjmp` use `sigprocmask` and
`sigaltstack`. However those calls were not implemented making `lua` and `ksh`
crash. (fixed by *jpsz*)

[comment]: <> (naprawienie getdirentries przywróciło ls dołożenie ioctl pozwoli nam zrobić obsługę terminala • naprawienie execve przywróciło działanie skryptów lua • dołożyliśmy wywołania systemowe, które przywróciły działanie setjmp i longjmp (lua + ksh powróciły do życia))
