Title: #4 bi-weekly progress report
Date: 2019-12-02 16:00
Category: Blog

Good news! Thanks to **JUrb** contributions we can create, delete and list
directories on `tmpfs` filesystem! We've got some contributions from students who
do not participate in the course officially :)

 * More tests for process groups (`setpgid`, `kill`, `killpg`). **AChud**
  
  Some simple functional tests for syscalls related to process
  identity were added to test suite. The more tests, the safer we
  are. Good!

 * Fix: don't deliver signals to zombie processes. **JMaz** 
 
   The `kill` syscall didn't check target process state when posting a
   signal, what caused kernel panic when the target was a zombie. This
   issue has been fixed.
   
 * Debugging: automatically swap user program symbols. **JMaz**

 As in case of other OSes, a session of Mimiker will most likely
 consists of multiple user process invocation.  Our debug
 infrastructure, however, was unable to load appropriate debugging
 symbols from `ELF` file of currently running user-mode process,
 sticking to symbols from the first ELF file ever loaded. This defect
 has been repaired.

* Build kernel/user-space with Clang and run tests under CircleCI. **JPiec**

These two pull requests provide full support for building Mimiker with
Clang, both locally and as a Docker container in the cloud environment
CircleCI. We use CircleCI to run functional tests on pushed code
before merging it with master branch of Mimiker GitHub repository.

* `vmem` allocator: simplify code and add missing functions. **JPsz**

Virtual address allocator `vmem` was able to allocate virtual space
segments, but not to deallocate them. This has been fixed. Some
polishing was also done, like the allocation strategy was changed from
instant-fit to best-fit, thus decreasing likehood of fragmentation.

* `tmpfs`: implement `readdir`, `rmdir`, `rmdir` v-node operations. **JUrb**

In process of developing Mimiker's own `tmpfs` implementation
`readdir`, `rmdir`, `rmdir` operations were crafted and attached
to virtual file-system infrastructure.

* implement `mkdir` & `rmdir` syscall. **JUrb**

Apparently, Mimiker didn't have `mkdir` & `rmdir` syscalls. Upto now
the only filesystem available was `intird`, whose directory tree was
fixed before system startup. With the implementation of `tmpfs` making
these syscalls available became justified.

* Import `echo`, `mkdir`, `rmdir` & `pwd` commands from NetBSD. **Cahir**

Once directory and file-manipulating syscalls and vops are
implemented, it remains to provide user with corresponding
command-line tools. These taken from NetBSD simply work!

* Use high-resolution MIPS CPU timer for system clock. **Cahir**

Current hardware platform of Mimiker, the Malta board features legacy
`PIIX4` south bridge with `8254 Programmable Interrupt Timer`, which
upto now has been used as Mimiker's system clock. Some time ago, in
order to make kernel more hardware-agnostic and to provide it with
higher-resolution measuring capabilities, **Cahir** decided to use a
timer built in the CPU and implemented it as one of Mimiker's
device. But at that time Qemu emulation of MIPS CPU was flawed, and
the emulated timer failed to provide accurate measures. This has been
recently fixed, and Cahir's code started to work as expected.

* Move kernel thread stacks, pool allocators, physical memory
   allocator to kernel virtual address space. **Cahir**

More and more kernel subsystems are being moved to virtual
space. Great!

* Introduce `kmem`: kernel wired virtual memory allocator. **Cahir**

Brand new kernel subsystem has arrived: 'kmem' is a low-level kernel
memory allocator serving arbitrary page-aligned virtual memory
blocks. It employs, but shouldn't be confused with, both `vmem`
(virtual address-space manager) and `pmem` (page-table manager). It
is, in turn, employed by pooled allocator `pool` and general-purpose
allocator `kmalloc`.


* Simplify kernel bootstrap: add list of physical memory segments. **Cahir**
