Title: #2 bi-weekly progress report
Date: 2019-11-04 16:00
Category: Blog

### Kernel finally runs in virtual space!

Well, not quite, but let us introduce some context first. For the time being the
only platform supported by Mimiker is MIPS 24KEc 32-bit processor on Malta
board. The address space of 4GiB is split into two haves: _useg_ for user
programs and _ksegX_ for kernel. There're four _ksegX_ segments, 512MiB each.
Physical memory is accessible directly through _kseg0_ and _kseg1_ segments.
For _useg_, _kseg2_, _kseg3_ segments, virtual to physical address translation
is performed in hardware using TLB (_Translation Lookaside Buffer_).
Unfortunately, most MIPS processors don't support _hardware page table walkers_.
The processor invokes exception handling routine whenever it can translate
address using entries present in TLB. Operating system is responsible for
replacing entries in TLB. This introduces extra level of complexity and caused
several failed attempts to move kernel to virtual addresses.

While there's nothing fundamentally wrong in running kernel in _kseg0_, such
address space organization is not compatible with _Aarch64_ nor _x86-64_. This
prevents us from porting Mimiker to _Raspberry Pi3_. Moreover, fully fledged
kernels require to be run in memory that is pageable, for instance to enable
swapping kernel buffers to disk.

The #406181a commit brings kernel image (i.e. _text_, _data_, _bss_) sections to
TLB managed virtual memory. But, there's still some work do be done.  Namely,
kernel stacks and dynamic memory allocators still operate in _kseg0_. **(by
Cahir)**

### Signal handlers work!

Manpower shortage forces us to take lazy approach to Mimiker development: we
only fix things that are really broken. There are multiple reasons for Korn
shell (ksh) doesn't behave correctly. One of them was buggy implementation of
return from user-defined signal handlers. Since signals are delivered during
return to user-space, returning from signal handler should restore user context.
But signal handler is just a user defined C function, not pretending to know its
real purpose. Upon return it acts according to SysV-ABI trying to jump back to a
non-existing caller routine, what definitely leads to a crash. That was solved
by using *trampoline* approach. When preparing a stack frame of signal handler,
the return address is set to point to a piece of code (called the trampoline)
which simply invokes a *sigreturn* syscall, which responsibility is to restore
the required user context. The trampoline resides in user space at the bottom of
the stack. This **will** lead to serious problems when we make user stack
non-executable, but this won't happen soon :) **(by JPsz)**

### *siglongjmp* and *sigsetjmp* tests

*siglongjmp*/*sigsetjmp* works exactly as *longjmp*/*setjmp* and in addition
restore/save blocked signal mask. Some tests were added to certify, that those
system calls work as expected. Unfortunately *sigprocmask* implementation is a
dummy, but we'll take care of it later. **(by JPsz)**

### Other contributions:

 * Backtrace command in GNU debugger passes kernel-user boundary **(by JMzr)**
 * Fix pipe(2) read not returning short counts **(by JPsz)**
 * First attempt to create files & directories in tmpfs **(by JUrb)**
 * Implement fcntl syscall (only `F_DUPFD` command) **(by JPsz)**
 * Adapt full FAT implementation for _Aarch64_ kernel prototype **(by PJas)**
